Write blog post on system dependencies in GitHub Actions continuous integration workflows (#165)
r-hub/blog: content/post/2023-06-06-system-dependencies/index.Rmd

---
slug: system-dependency
title: "System Dependencies in R Packages & Automatic Testing" 
authors: 
- Hugo Gruson
date: "2023-06-06" 
tags: 
- package development 
- r-package
output: hugodown::hugo_document
---

<!-- FIXME: Use this image for social media: https://pixabay.com/fr/photos/alice-anglais-pays-des-merveilles-2902560/ -->

```{r setup, include=FALSE}

knitr::opts_chunk$set(fig.path = "", comment = "", warning = FALSE)
# knitr hook to make images output use Hugo options
knitr::knit_hooks$set(
  plot = function(x, options) {
    hugoopts <- options$hugoopts
    paste0(
      "{{<figure src=",
      '"', x, '" ',
      if (!is.null(hugoopts)) {
        glue::glue_collapse(
          glue::glue('{names(hugoopts)}="{hugoopts}"'),
          sep = " "
        )
      },
      ">}}\n"
    )
  }
)
options(crayon.enabled = FALSE)

```

> In a previous post, we discussed about a package dependency that goes slightly beyond the normal R package ecosystem dependency: R itself.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In a [previous post](/2022/09/12/r-dependency/), we discussed about a package dependency that goes slightly beyond the normal R package ecosystem dependency: R itself.
```

> Today, we step even further and discuss about dependencies that have nothing to do with R: system dependencies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Today, we step even further and discuss dependencies that have nothing to do with R: system dependencies.
```

I'd rephrase "nothing to do with R", because we still want to use them from R.

Reviewer: I'd recommend adding examples of system dependencies and related packages right in the intro, to clarify the topic.

> Today, we step even further and discuss about dependencies that have nothing to do with R: system dependencies.

Author: ```suggestion
Today, we step even further and discuss dependencies outside of R: system dependencies.
```

In particular, we are going to talk about system dependencies in the context of automated testing: is there anything extra to do when setting continuous integration for your package with system dependencies?
How does it work behind the scenes?
And how to work with edge cases?

## Introduction: specifying system dependencies in R packages

Before jumping right into the topic of continuous integration, let's take a moment to introduce, or remind you, how system dependencies are specified in R packages.

> You can directly jump to the next session if this concept is fresh in your memory.

Reviewer: I'd remove this, the reader doesn't need this permission slip. :smile_cat: 
```suggestion
```

> Let's imagine we have a package depending on The official 'Writing R Extensions' guide states [^1]:

Reviewer: incomplete sentence?

> Let's imagine we have a package depending on The official 'Writing R Extensions' guide states [^1]:

Author: ```suggestion
The official 'Writing R Extensions' guide states [^1]:
```

> [^1]: For R history fans, this has been the case [since R 1.7.0](https://github.com/r-devel/r-svn/blob/9c46956fd784c6985867aca069b926d774602928/doc/NEWS.1#L2348-L2350).

Reviewer: add the year of that version?

> Dependencies external to the R system should be listed in the 'SystemRequirements' field, possibly amplified in a separate README file.

> One important thing to note is that this field contains free text.

Reviewer: mention that as such, it's not used by R automatically at all?

As such, to refer to the same piece of software, you could write either one of the following in the package `DESCRIPTION`:

``` yaml
SystemRequirements: ExternalSoftware
```

``` yaml
SystemRequirements: ExternalSoftware 0.1
```

``` yaml
SystemRequirements: lib-externalsoftware
```

> ## The general case: everything works automagically

Reviewer: I once read mailchimp removed the word "automagically" from their style guide but I can't find the source again nor remember the reason. :sob:

Author: The only reason I can imagine is that it might be unclear for non-native speakers. I can maybe add a link to https://english.stackexchange.com/questions/26618/what-is-the-purpose-of-using-the-word-automagically-when-we-already-have-auto behind the word?

Reviewer: Or just take the risk to leave it as is, I feel that's better than adding a link. :thinking:

> If while reading the previous section, you could already sense the problems linked to the fact `SystemRequirements` is a free-text field, fret not!

Reviewer: I'd add some sort of spoiler in the previous section ("free-text (yes, free-text...)") or so then

In the very large majority of cases, setting up continuous integration in an R package with system dependencies is exactly the same as with any other R package.

> Using, as often, the supercharged usethis package, you can automatically create the relevant GitHub Actions workflow file in your project [^2]:

Reviewer: It'd be worth defining GitHub actions and introducing earlier that this will be the main example of CI in this post?

> [^2]: Alternatively, if you're not using usethis, you can manually copy-paste the relevant GitHub Actions workflow file from the `examples` of the `r-lib/actions` project.

Reviewer: link to it?

          - {os: ubuntu-latest,   r: 'release'}
          - {os: ubuntu-latest,   r: 'oldrel-1'}

    env:
      GITHUB_PAT: ${{ secrets.GITHUB_TOKEN }}
      R_KEEP_PKG_SOURCE: yes

    steps:
      - uses: actions/checkout@v3

      - uses: r-lib/actions/setup-pandoc@v2

      - uses: r-lib/actions/setup-r@v2
        with:
          r-version: ${{ matrix.config.r }}
          http-user-agent: ${{ matrix.config.http-user-agent }}
          use-public-rspm: true

      - uses: r-lib/actions/setup-r-dependencies@v2
        with:
          extra-packages: any::rcmdcheck
          needs: check

      - uses: r-lib/actions/check-r-package@v2
        with:
          upload-snapshots: true
```

You may notice there is no explicit mention of system dependencies in this file.
Yet, if we use this workflow in an R package with system dependencies, everything will work out-of-the-box in most cases.
So, when are system dependencies installed?
And how the workflow does even know which dependencies to install since the `SystemRequirements` is free text that may not correspond to the exact name of a library?

The magic happens in the `r-lib/actions/setup-r-dependencies` step.

> If you want to learn about it, you can read the source code of this step.

Reviewer: link?

It is mostly written in R but it contains a lot of bells and whistles to handle messaging within the GitHub Actions context and as such, it would be too long to go through it line by line in this post.
However, at a glance, you can notice many mentions of the [pak R package](https://pak.r-lib.org/).

> If it's the first you're hearing about the pak package, we strongly recommend we go through the [list of the most important pak features](https://pak.r-lib.org/reference/features.html).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If it's the first time you're hearing about the pak package, we strongly recommend we go through the [list of pak features](https://pak.r-lib.org/reference/features.html).
```

This link is for ALL features?
Maybe mention the highlight `pak::pak()`?

Author: I'm not sure. The vignette is named "A list of the most important pak features"

Reviewer: oh right :woman_facepalming:

> It is packed with many very powerful feature.

Reviewer: maybe embrace the pun
```suggestion
It is paked, hum packed with many very powerful features.
```

The specific feature we're interested in here is the automatic install of system dependencies via [`pak::pkg_sysreqs()`](https://pak.r-lib.org/reference/local_system_requirements.html), which in turn uses `pkgdepends::sysreqs_install_plan()`.

We now understand more precisely where the magic happens but it still doesn't explain how pak is able to know which precise piece of software to install from the free text `SystemRequirements` field.

> As often when you want to increase your understanding, it is helpful to [read the source](https://blog.r-hub.io/2019/05/14/read-the-source/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As often when you want to increase your understanding, it is helpful to [read the source](/2019/05/14/read-the-source/).
```

While browsing pkgdepends source code, we see a call to <https://github.com/r-hub/r-system-requirements>.

This repository contains a set of [rules](https://github.com/rstudio/r-system-requirements/tree/main/rules) as json files which match unformatted software name via regular expressions to the exact libraries for each major operating system.

> Let's walk through an example together:

Reviewer: if you use an example in the intro, then use it here again.

It means that some extra steps might be required to do so.
Let's review these possible solutions together in order of complexity.

### Fix it for everybody by submitting a pull request

One first option might be that the regular expression used by `r-hub/r-system-requirements` to convert the free text in `SystemRequirements` to a library distributed by your operating system does not recognize what is in `SystemRequirements`.

To identify if this is the case, you need to find the file containing the specific rule for the system dependency of interest in `r-hub/r-system-requirements`, and test the regular expression on the contents of `SystemRequirements`.

If we re-use the cuda example from the previous section and we are wondering why it is not automatically installed for a package specifying "cudaa":

```{r}
stringr::str_match("cudaa", c("\\bnvcc\\b", "\\bcuda\\b"))
```

This test confirms that the `SystemRequirements` field contents are not recognized by the regular expression.
Depending on the case, the best course of action might be to:

-   either edit the contents of `SystemRequirements` so that it's picked up by the regular expression

> -   or submit a pull request to `r-hub/r-system-requirements` if you believe the regular expression is too restrictive and should be updated

Reviewer: link to an example PR?

Author: @gaborcsardi, could you confirm that `r-hub/r-system-requirements` is really the repo where PR should be submitted? Or does it make more sense to submit it to the upstream `rstudio/r-system-requirements`?

Reviewer 2: It should be submitted upstream at `rstudio/r-system-requirements`.

Reviewer 2: @Bisaloo In fact, I wouldn't even mention `r-hub/r-system-requirements`, only the upstream repo.

Author: Great, thanks for your fast answer! This also means that changes will take time to propagate even when merged upstream? Or do you automatically regularly update the fork?

Reviewer 2: Changes do take time, nothing uses that repo "live", so PPM changes take time, and pak changes take time as well, and yes, the latter are manual. 
This is to avoid having an upstream breaking change, e.g. a schema change, breaking pak.

> Note however that the first option is likely always the simplest as it doesn't impact all the rest of the ecosystem (which is why `r-system-requirements` maintainers might be reluctant to relax a regular expression) and it is often something directly in your control, rather than a third-party.

Reviewer: also it might take more time to wait for the PR to be reviewed

> ### Install system dependencies manually

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Install system dependencies "manually"
```

So, instead of having the usual structure, you have an extra step "Install extra system dependencies manually" that may look something like this:

``` diff
jobs:
  R-CMD-check:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    env:
      GITHUB_PAT: ${{ secrets.GITHUB_TOKEN }}
      R_KEEP_PKG_SOURCE: yes
    steps:
      - uses: actions/checkout@v3

      - uses: r-lib/actions/setup-r@v2
        with:
          use-public-rspm: true

+      - name: Install extra system dependencies manually
+        run:
+          wget ...
+          make
+          sudo make install

      - uses: r-lib/actions/setup-r-dependencies@v2
        with:
          extra-packages: any::rcmdcheck
          needs: check

      - uses: r-lib/actions/check-r-package@v2
```

#### Using a Docker image in GitHub Actions

Alternatively, you can do the manual installation in a Docker image and use this image in your GitHub Actions workflow.
This is a particularly good solution if there is already a public Docker image or you already wrote a `DOCKERFILE` for your own local development purposes.
If you use a public image, you can follow the steps in the official documentation to integrate it to your workflow.

> If you use a `DOCKERFILE`, you can follow [the answers to this stackoverflow question](https://stackoverflow.com/q/61154750/4439357) (in a nutshell, use `docker compose` in your job or publish the image first and then follow the official documentation).

Reviewer: could you link to some basic tutorial as well? and to an example in a GitHub Action workflow?

Author: I will add a link to this example once it's finalized: https://github.com/sbfnk/rbi/pull/46 (shouldn't be long once I'm back from leave)

## Conclusion

> In this post, we have quickly reviewed how to specify system requirements for R package, how this seemingly innocent task requires a very complex infrastructure so that it can be understood by automated tools and that your dependencies are smoothly installed in a single command.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this post, we have provided an overview of how to specify system requirements for R package, how this seemingly innocent task requires a very complex infrastructure so that it can be understood by automated tools and that your dependencies are smoothly installed in a single command.
```

We also gave some pointers on what to do if you're in one of the rare cases where the automated tools don't or can't work.

One final note on this topic is that there might be a move from CRAN to start requiring more standardization in the `SystemRequirements` field.

> One R package developer has reported being asked to change "Java (\>= 8)" to "Java JRE 8 or higher".

Reviewer: is there a link to this report?

Author: Unfortunately, it was a thread in the grrr slack workspace so nothing public.

Author: This is the message in case you're curious: https://r-grrr.slack.com/archives/C9N6AESJG/p1682499615940129?thread_ts=1682495187.488019&cid=C9N6AESJG

> In all cases, it is probably good practice to do this on your own and check what other R packages with similar system dependencies are writing in `SystemRequirements`.

Reviewer: I'd actually move this to the part where you present the field.

However, at a glance, you can notice many mentions of the [pak R package](https://pak.r-lib.org/).

If it's the first time you're hearing about the pak package, we strongly recommend we go through the [list of the most important pak features](https://pak.r-lib.org/reference/features.html).
It is ~~paked~~ packed with many very powerful features.
The specific feature we're interested in here is the automatic install of system dependencies via [`pak::pkg_sysreqs()`](https://pak.r-lib.org/reference/local_system_requirements.html), which in turn uses `pkgdepends::sysreqs_install_plan()`.

We now understand more precisely where the magic happens but it still doesn't explain how pak is able to know which precise piece of software to install from the free text `SystemRequirements` field.
As often when you want to increase your understanding, it is helpful to [read the source](/2019/05/14/read-the-source/).
While browsing pkgdepends source code, we see a call to <https://github.com/r-hub/r-system-requirements>.

> This repository contains a set of [rules](https://github.com/rstudio/r-system-requirements/tree/main/rules) as json files which match unformatted software name via regular expressions to the exact libraries for each major operating system.

Author: The text is correct as it is right now as far as I can tell but there is a small unexplained gap:

- pkgdepends source code links to `r-hub/r-system-requirements`
- PRs should be sent `rstudio/r-system-requirements`

I don't explain the difference between the two and why I go from linking one to the other on the following line. I can maybe just add a note linking to [this thread](https://github.com/r-hub/blog/pull/165#discussion_r1280644182)?

> This repository contains a set of [rules](https://github.com/rstudio/r-system-requirements/tree/main/rules) as json files which match unformatted software name via regular expressions to the exact libraries for each major operating system.

Reviewer: @gaborcsardi can you help?

> This repository contains a set of [rules](https://github.com/rstudio/r-system-requirements/tree/main/rules) as json files which match unformatted software name via regular expressions to the exact libraries for each major operating system.

Reviewer 2: The rstudio repo is the canonical truth, PRs should go there.

``` diff
jobs:
  R-CMD-check:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
+    container: ghcr.io/org/repo:main
    env:
      GITHUB_PAT: ${{ secrets.GITHUB_TOKEN }}
      R_KEEP_PKG_SOURCE: yes
    steps:
      - uses: actions/checkout@v3

      - uses: r-lib/actions/setup-r@v2
        with:
          use-public-rspm: true

      - uses: r-lib/actions/setup-r-dependencies@v2
        with:
          extra-packages: any::rcmdcheck
          needs: check

      - uses: r-lib/actions/check-r-package@v2
```

You can again see [a real-life example in the rbi R package](https://github.com/sbfnk/rbi/pull/46/files).

## Conclusion

In this post, we have provided an overview of how to specify system requirements for R package, how this seemingly innocent task requires a very complex infrastructure so that it can be understood by automated tools and that your dependencies are smoothly installed in a single command.
We also gave some pointers on what to do if you're in one of the rare cases where the automated tools don't or can't work.

One final note on this topic is that there might be a move from CRAN to start requiring more standardization in the `SystemRequirements` field.

> One R package developer has reported being asked to change "Java (\>= 8)" to "Java JRE 8 or higher".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One R package developer has reported being asked to change "Java JRE 8 or higher" to "Java (\>= 8)".
```
If I read the message correctly, it's the other way round.

Author: You're completely right, thanks! I've read this message so many times. I'm not sure how I manage to understand the opposite :facepalm:
